So we talked about the Cascade
and specificity in the last lecture,
and these concepts can absolutely be a bit hard to grasp.
So let's now look at an example that I prepared for you
and which is actually pretty similar
to what we looked at in the last lecture.
In order to that, let's open a CodePen
so that I can quickly experiment with some code.
Now, in case you're not familiar with CodePen,
it's just a very simple web app
where we can input HTML, CSS and JavaScript code
and experiment with it,
and it will then render the result down here, okay?
So if you wanna follow this quick example,
then just go to CodePen,
codepen.io,
and it will probably,
yeah so create a new pen.
And then you can just copy the codes
that I have in my CodePen here.
So just pause the video and copy the code if you want,
but I think it's not really necessary if you don't wanna.
You can just watch me explaining stuff here
in this CodePen that I have prepared already.
So this is again, similar to the example
that we had in the previous slide.
So down here we have the "don't click" button.
So we have four selectors here
that actually select this button
and try to give it a different background color.
So it's simply at the button class selector here,
then we have to anchor element selector.
We have this huge crazy selector here,
and then we have this one here
which actually has a hover pseudo class.
So let's see what happens.
So as we already saw,
this one has a pretty low specificity, right?
Because it has just one class.
And this one here, even worse.
This is almost like the lowest specificity possible.
And so these blue and purple color, there's almost no way
that we can have this color here on the button.
But there is one way though, right? Remember?
Because even if the specificity is really low,
we can give these declarations a higher importance,
and then the specificity doesn't even matter
because if they're more important, they will be applied.
And so for example, if we put an "important" here
and wait till it updates, then here, right,
we have the purple color that we specified here.
And so now, even with the lowest specificity possible,
we have the purple background color simply because
we made this declaration more important than all the others.
And the same thing will of course work if we put it here.
Just to show it to you. Of course it turns blue.
Now I already mentioned that we shouldn't really use
this "important" unless there is something really weird
going on in your code.
But usually if you need to use "important,
then that's a pretty bad sign,
and you should probably go back and refactor your code
and change some stuff in there.
Now what I really wanted to show you though
is these two selectors down here.
So you see that currently this declaration here
is the one that applies because this selector
is the one with the highest specificity of these three,
not counting this one here right now
because it's on a hover state.
So this is supposed to only turn yellow
when we hover the button.
Now, what actually happens when we now hover the button.
Let's try it out.
And it doesn't turn yellow, right?
Even though it's specified here
that the button when it's hovered should turn yellow.
So why is that happening?
And it is happening for a very simple reason
because remember that pseudo classes
also count into the specificity,
so this one here counts one into specificity.
Now if we do the Math of this selector,
which has one iD such as this one,
it has one
and two classes,
and this is also one and two classes
because this one counts as if it was a class.
But then this one has two elements, and this only has one.
And therefore, this selector here is more specific.
So again, there's the same amount of iDs,
the same amount of classes,
but this one here has two more elements, "div" and "a",
while this one only has one.
And so, no matter if it says hover or whatever it says here,
this one is more specific
and therefore is the one that applies, not this one.
No matter if you hover it or not,
the specificity is lower and so it cannot be applied.
If we want the background color to be yellow,
then we will need a selector
which has an even higher specificity.
So let's just copy this one here.
So hover here says something else like "green".
Let's see what happens now. And now it turns green.
And that's because now, this selector here
has a higher specificity than this one, right?
Because of course, this one here,
this part is the same as this.
But then we add one pseudo class
and so all of a sudden this one here is more specific
and then it applies.
So you see that not only we have to make sure
that we have the hover pseudo class in place
if you want a hover effect,
also the selector should have a higher specificity
than the original one, which in this case is this one.
This usually isn't a problem,
but I believe I had it happen to me a couple of times
that I was writing some really complex navigation
in one of my sites,
and all of a sudden the hovers weren't working,
and nothing was really working as I was expecting.
And so I had to learn it the hard way
by experimenting a lot and finding out why it didn't work.
So that's why I'm warning you here
that you should be careful with your selector specificities.
So it's really important that you keep this in mind
in case something isn't working the way you expect.
Alright, and I hope that with this,
you now really understood how specificity
is an important work
so that you can write better codes in future
and also be able to debug your code
in case something isn't working properly.
It's also a really important skill when you're writing CSS.